docs: initial content for iOS Marshalling (#31)
NativeScript/docs: content/guide/ios-marshalling.md

---
title: iOS Marshalling
---

NativeScript for iOS handles the conversion between JavaScript and Objective-C data types.  The following is a thorough but not exhaustive list of rules and exceptions NativeScript abides by when exposing Objective-C APIs in JavaScript.

> ## Converting Objective-C Classes and Objects

Reviewer: What about Swift?

```objc
NSDateFormatter *formatter = [[NSDateFormatter alloc] init];
NSDate *date = [NSDate date];
NSString *formattedDate = [formatter stringFromDate:date];
```

```js
const formatter = new NSDateFormatter()
const date = NSDate.date()
const formattedDate = formatter.stringFromDate(date)
```

An API expecting the `id` data type in Objective-C means it will accept any Objective-C class or object in JavaScript.

```objc
NSMutableArray *array = [[NSMutableArray alloc] init];
Class buttonClass = [UIButton class];
UIButton *button = [[buttonClass alloc] init];
[array setObject:buttonClass atIndex:0];
[array setObject:button atIndex:1];
```

```js
const array = new NSMutableArray()
const buttonClass = UIButton
const button = new buttonClass()
array.setObjectAtIndex(buttonClass, 0)
array.setObjectAtIndex(button, 1)
```

## Calling Objective-C/Swift methods with multiple arguments

Consider the following `NSMutableArray` selector: `replaceObjectsInRange:withObjectsFromArray:range:`. 

In JavaScript it is represented by: `replaceObjectsInRangeWithObjectsFromArrayRange(objectsToRange, sourceArray, sourceRange)` (argument names are arbitrary). 

> The function name is generated by appending the names of the arguments as defined by the Objective-C selector by starting with a small letter for the first argument and appending each subsequent with a capital letter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In Objective-C, when generating the function name for a method, it follows a convention of appending the names of the arguments defined by the Objective-C selector. The function name starts with a lowercase letter for the first argument and appends subsequent arguments with a capital letter.

This naming convention helps to create unique and descriptive function names based on the arguments of the method. By incorporating the argument names into the function name, it provides clarity and readability when working with Objective-C APIs.

It's important to note that this convention is specific to Objective-C and may differ from naming conventions in other programming languages.
```

On the other hand, any API that expects a `NSNull`, `NSNumber`, `NSString` or `NSDate` instance in Objective-C can be called either with a wrapper object or a JavaScript value - `null`, `number` or `boolean`, `string` or `Date`, in JavaScript. The conversion is automatically handled by NativeScript.

### Converting numeric types

```ts
console.log(`pow(2.5, 3) = ${Math.pow(2.5, 3)}`);
```

> The iOS Runtime converts the JavaScript `number` literals to native doubles and passes them to the native `pow(double x, double y)` function. The returned native integer is automatically converted to a JavaScript number and passed to `console.log()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The iOS Runtime converts JavaScript number literals to native doubles and utilizes the native pow(double x, double y) function. The resulting native integer is automatically converted back to a JavaScript number and then passed as an argument to console.log() for output..
```

### Converting string
```ts
let button = UIButton.new();
button.setTitleForState('Button title', UIControlState.Normal); 
console.log(button.titleLabel.text);
```

`Button title` is converted to `NSString` and the returned `NSString` is converted to JavaScript `string`.

### Converting boolean

```ts
let str = NSString.stringWithString('YES');
let isTrue = str.boolValue;
```

## Objective-C Protocols

> Protocols in Objective-C are like interfaces in other languages - they are blueprints of what members a class should contain, a sort of an API contract. Protocols are exposed as empty objects in JavaScript. Protocols are usually only referenced when [subclassing](/guide/subclassing/extending-classes-and-conforming-protocols-ios) an Objective-C class or when checking whether an object or class conforms to a protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protocols in Objective-C serve a similar purpose as interfaces in other programming languages. They define a blueprint or contract that specifies the members (methods, properties, etc.) that a class should implement.  Protocols are exposed as empty objects in JavaScript. Protocols are usually only referenced when [subclassing](/guide/subclassing/extending-classes-and-conforming-protocols-ios) an Objective-C class or when checking whether an object or class conforms to a protocol.
```

```objc
BOOL isCopying = [NSArray conformsToProtocol:@protocol(NSCopying)];
```

```js
const isCopying = NSArray.conformsToProtocol(NSCopying)
```
To implement Objective-C/Swift protocols in NativeScript, hava look at [Conforming to Objective-C/Swift protocols in NativeScript](/guide/subclassing/extending-classes-and-conforming-protocols-ios#conforming-to-objective-c-swift-protocols-in-nativescript)

## Objective-C Selectors

> In Objective-C `SEL` is a data type that represents the name of a method of an Objective-C class. NativeScript exposes this data type as a JavaScript string. Whenever an API expects a selector value in Objective-C, it's JavaScript projection will expect a string with the method name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Objective-C, a `SEL` is a data type that represents a method name in an Objective-C class. NativeScript exposes this data type in the form of a JavaScript string. When working with APIs in Objective-C, if an API expects a selector value, the corresponding JavaScript projection in NativeScript will expect a string representing the method name.
```

```

```js
const aString = NSMutableString.alloc().init()
const hasAppend = aString.respondsToSelector('appendString:')
```

## Objective-C Blocks

[Objective-C blocks](https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/Cocoa/Conceptual/Blocks/Articles/00_Introduction.html) are anonymous functions in Objective-C. They can be closures, just like JavaScript functions, and are often used as callbacks. NativeScript implicitly exposes an Objective-C block as a JavaScript function. Any API that accepts a block in Objective-C accepts a JavaScript function when called in JavaScript:

```objc
NSURL *url = [NSURL URLWithString:@"http://example.com"];
NSURLRequest *request = [NSURLRequest requestWithURL:url];
[NSURLConnection sendAsynchronousRequest:request queue:nil completionHandler:^(NSURLResponse *response, NSData *data, NSError *connectionError) {
    NSLog(@"request complete");
}];
```

```js
const url = NSURL.URLWithString('http://example.com')
const request = NSURLRequest.requestWithURL(url)
NSURLConnection.sendAsynchronousRequestQueueCompletionHandler(
  request,
  null,
  (response, data, connectionError) => {
    console.log('request complete')
  }
)
```

> Blocks in Objective-C, especially blocks that are closures, need to be properly retained and released in order to not leak memory. NativeScript does this automatically - a block exposed as a JavaScript function is released as soon as the function is garbage collected. A JavaScript function implicitly converted to a block will not be garbage collected as long the block is not released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks in Objective-C, especially those that function as closures, require proper retention and release to avoid memory leaks. However, in NativeScript, this memory management is handled automatically. When a block is exposed as a JavaScript function, it is released as soon as the function is garbage collected. Conversely, a JavaScript function that is implicitly converted to a block will not be garbage collected as long as the block is retained.
```

+ (NSFileManager *)defaultManager;
- (NSArray *)contentsOfDirectoryAtPath:(NSString *)path error:(NSError **)error;
@end
```

We can use this method from JavaScript in the following way:

```js
const fileManager = NSFileManager.defaultManager
const bundlePath = NSBundle.mainBundle.bundlePath

console.log(fileManager.contentsOfDirectoryAtPathError(bundlePath, null))
```

If we want to check the error using out parameters:

```js
const errorRef = new interop.Reference()
fileManager.contentsOfDirectoryAtPathError('/not-existing-path', errorRef)
console.log(errorRef.value) // NSError: "The folder '/not-existing-path' doesn't exist."
```

Or we can skip passing the **last NSError \*\*** out parameter and a JavaScript error will be thrown if the `NSError **` is set from native:

```js
try {
  fileManager.contentsOfDirectoryAtPathError('/not-existing-path')
} catch (e) {
  console.log(e) // NSError: "The folder '/not-existing-path' doesn't exist."
}
```

### JavaScript to Native

When overriding a method having **NSError ** out parameter in the end** any thrown JavaScript error will be wrapped and set to the `NSError **` argument (if given).

### Pointer Types

> Languages in the C family have the notion of a pointer data type. A pointer is a value that points to another value, or, more accurately, to the location of that value in memory. JavaScript has no notion of pointers, but the pointer data type is used throughout the iOS SDK. To overcome this, NativeScript introduces the `Reference` object. References are special objects which allow JavaScript to reason about and access pointer values. Consider this example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Languages in the C family, including iOS SDK, utilize the concept of a pointer data type. Pointers are values that represent the memory location of another value. However, JavaScript, unlike C-based languages, does not have native support for pointers. To bridge this gap, NativeScript introduces the Reference object. References are special objects designed to enable JavaScript to handle and interact with pointer values. They provide a mechanism for JavaScript to reason about and access memory locations. To illustrate, consider the following example:
```

```objc
NSFileManager *fileManager = [NSFileManager defaultManager];
BOOL isDirectory;
BOOL exists = [fileManager fileExistsAtPath:@"/var/log" isDirectory:&isDirectory];
if (isDirectory) {
    NSLog(@"The path is actually a directory");
}
```

> This snippet calls the `fileExistsAtPath:isDirectory` method of the `NSFileManager` class. This method accepts a `NSString` as its first argument and a pointer to a boolean value as its second argument. During its execution the method will use the pointer to update the boolean value. This means it will directly change the value of `isDirectory`. The same code can be written as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code snippet invokes the fileExistsAtPath:isDirectory: method of the NSFileManager class. The method takes an NSString as its first argument and a pointer to a boolean value as its second argument. When executed, the method updates the boolean value directly using the provided pointer, allowing the isDirectory variable to be modified. The code can be alternatively expressed in the following manner:
```
